https://cmus.github.io/


cmus

    Home Features Documentation Download Development Wiki 

cmus is a small, fast and powerful console music player for Unix-like operating systems.
cmus screenshot

Share this page

    Identi.ca
    Delicious
    Digg
    StumbleUpon
    Google
    Yahoo
    Twitter
    Facebook

Features
Plugins

    Input: Ogg Vorbis, MP3, FLAC, Opus, Musepack, WavPack, WAV, AAC, MP4, audio CD, and everything supported by ffmpeg (WMA, APE, MKA, TTA, SHN, ...) and libmodplug
    Output: PulseAudio, ALSA, OSS, JACK, RoarAudio, CoreAudio, libao, sndio (OpenBSD), aRts, Sun, and WaveOut (Windows)

Playing

    Gapless playback
    ReplayGain support
    MP3 and Ogg streaming (SHOUTcast/Icecast)
    Play queue
    Optional playback resume on startup

Interface

    Instant startup, even with thousands of tracks
    Powerful playlist filters / live filtering
    Easy to use directory browser
    Customizable colors
    Dynamic keybindings. You can bind a key to any command, :seek +1m for example
    Vi / less style search mode
    Vi style command mode with tab completion

Misc

    CUE sheets support
    Excellent compilations handling
    Uses Unicode internally for all string handling
    Supports audio scrobbling (to e.g. Last.fm or Libre.fm) etc. via status display programs
    Can run external commands for the currently selected files (tag-editor for example)
    Can be controlled via UNIX socket using cmus-remote command
    Known to work on Linux, OS X, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD and Cygwin

Documentation
Installation
In case your favourite package manager provides an up to date version of cmus (see list of cmus packages), installation is straightforward, e.g.:

    Ubuntu: sudo apt-get install cmus
    OS X: brew install cmus

Otherwise, please consider compiling from source — it is not hard at all.
Usage
cmus comes with a great reference manual. If you have it installed, try
man cmus-tutorial, man cmus and man cmus-remote.
Online Documentation

    cmus wiki
    Articles about cmus (part of the wiki)

Download
Stable Releases

    cmus-2.7.1.tar.gz, released 13.07.2015
    Cmus has gained support for conditionals in format strings, sndio output plugin (OpenBSD), VTX input plugin (ZX Spectrum, Atari, Amstrad CPC), and optional mouse support. More detailed list of changes can be found in the release notes.
    cmus-2.6.2.tar.gz, released 29.06.2015
    Major new features are display of all tracks when artist is selected in tree view, JACK output and Opus input plugins. Please see release notes for a more detailed list of changes since 2.5.x.
    cmus-2.5.1.tar.gz, released 14.05.2014
    Since 2.4.x., cmus has gained CUE sheets support, cdio input plugin, new «zenburn» color scheme, as well as tons of minor enhancements and new features — detailed release notes can be found here.
    cmus-v2.4.3.tar.bz2, released 30.11.2011
    Compared to 2.3.x series, this release features tons of improvements, with most notable ones being live library/playlist filtering and playback resume support — please see the full release notes here.
    cmus-v2.3.5.tar.bz2, released 10.04.2011
    Among other things, this release (compared to 2.2.0) features gapless MP3 playback, native PulseAudio support, faster startup, and much improved compilations handling.
    cmus-v2.2.0.tar.bz2, released 27.07.2007
    When trees were tall, and grass was green...

More information on older releases can be found on cmus' freshmeat page.
Bleeding Edge

If you want to help cmus development and be among the first to try the latest and greatest features, use the pu (proposed updates) branch, e.g.:

git clone -b pu https://github.com/cmus/cmus.git
cd cmus
./configure prefix=$HOME/cmus
make install

You may want to add the installation directory to your PATH, e.g.:

echo 'export PATH=$HOME/cmus/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.bashrc ; . ~/.bashrc

Since the branch is recreated, you need to use this command to update the source tree (instead of git pull):

git remote update && git reset --hard origin/pu

Don't hesitate to submit an issue if you have any problems, suggestions or bug reports.
Development
GitHub page

https://github.com/cmus/cmus
Mailing List

The mailing list now serves as an archive for old releases and issues. Please use the github issues page for any problems, suggestions, or bug reports.

cmus-devel@lists.sourceforge.net

Gmane mirror
Dependencies

    ncurses (ncursesw recommended)

Optional Dependencies

    libpulse (PulseAudio)
    alsa-lib (ALSA)
    OSS (OSS)
    libroar (RoarAudio)
    libao (libao)
    aRts (aRts)
    libcdio (cdio plugin)
    libcddb (cdio plugin)
    FLAC (.flac)
    Opus (.opus)
    libvorbis (.ogg)
    libmpcdec (.mpc, .mpp, .mp+)
    wavpack (.wv)
    libmad (.mp3)
    libavcodec (.wma, .ape, .mka, .tta, .shn, ...)
    FAAD (.aac)
    mp4v2, FAAD (.mp4, .m4a, .m4b)
    libmodplug (.mod, .s3m, ...)
    libmikmod (.mod, .s3m, ...)


